---
layout: post
title: "ubifs mtd"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}
#0
UBI attach到一个MTD device上，生成一个UBI Device。这个UBI Device上又可以创建几个volumes.然后，这个volumes上面可以创建UBIFS文件系统。

来自mtd官方doc中的ubifs

    MTD subsystem, which provides uniform interface to access flash chips. MTD provides an notion of MTD devices (e.g., /dev/mtd0) which basically represents raw flash;
    UBI subsystem, which is a wear-leveling and volume management system for flash devices; UBI works on top of MTD devices and provides a notion of UBI volumes; UBI volumes are higher level entities than MTD devices and they are devoid of many unpleasant issues MTD devices have (e.g., wearing and bad blocks); see here for more information;
    UBIFS file system, which works on top of UBI volumes.

#1.内核配置
没什么好说的

#2.mtd
##1.mtd
###1.mach-*.c
略，以后用时补上

###2.CONFIG_MTD_CMDLINE_PARTS
这个要做为内核命令行的参数。u-boot环境变量的设置见后面。

Documentation/kernel-parameters.txt说mtdparts见drivers/mtd/cmdlinepart.c

The format for the command line is as follows:

    mtdparts=<mtddef>[;<mtddef]
    <mtddef>  := <mtd-id>:<partdef>[,<partdef>]
                 where <mtd-id> is the name from the "cat /proc/mtd" command
    <partdef> := <size>[@offset][<name>][ro][lk]
    <mtd-id>  := unique name used in mapping driver/device (mtd->name)
    <size>    := standard linux memsize OR "-" to denote all remaining space
    <name>    := '(' NAME ')'

Examples:
 
    1 NOR Flash, with 1 single writable partition:
    edb7312-nor:-
    The format for the command line is as follows:
 
    1 NOR Flash with 2 partitions, 1 NAND with one
    edb7312-nor:256k(ARMboot)ro,-(root);edb7312-nand:-(home)

u-boot:

help mtdparts

    this command uses three environment variables:

    'partition' - keeps current partition identifier mtdparts命令有显示

    partition  := <part-id>
    <part-id>  := <dev-id>,part_num

    'mtdids' - linux kernel mtd device id <-> u-boot device id mapping

    mtdids=<idmap>[,<idmap>,...]

    <idmap>    := <dev-id>=<mtd-id>
    <dev-id>   := 'nand'|'nor'|'onenand'<dev-num>
    <dev-num>  := mtd device number, 0...
    <mtd-id>   := unique device tag used by linux kernel to find mtd device (mtd->name)

    'mtdparts' - partition list

    mtdparts=mtdparts=<mtd-def>[;<mtd-def>...] 有两个mtdparts
    <mtd-def>  := <mtd-id>:<part-def>[,<part-def>...]
    <mtd-id>   := unique device tag used by linux kernel to find mtd device (mtd->name)
    <part-def> := <size>[@<offset>][<name>][<ro-flag>]
    <size>     := standard linux memsize OR '-' to denote all remaining space       
    <offset>   := partition start offset within the device
    <name>     := '(' NAME ')' 要用括号括起来的
    <ro-flag>  := when set to 'ro' makes partition read-only (not used, passed to kernel)

##2.Nand simulator
模拟一个Nand flash。文档在mtd官网的Nand FAQ中，可以用下面的代nandsim的参数来生成不同大小和不同页大小的nand。

    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0x33 - 16MiB, 512 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0x35 - 32MiB, 512 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0x36 - 64MiB, 512 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0x78 - 128MiB, 512 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0x71 - 256MiB, 512 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0xa2 third_id_byte=0x00 fourth_id_byte=0x15 - 64MiB, 2048 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0xec second_id_byte=0xa1 third_id_byte=0x00 fourth_id_byte=0x15 - 128MiB, 2048 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0xaa third_id_byte=0x00 fourth_id_byte=0x15 - 256MiB, 2048 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0x20 second_id_byte=0xac third_id_byte=0x00 fourth_id_byte=0x15 - 512MiB, 2048 bytes page;
    modprobe nandsim first_id_byte=0xec second_id_byte=0xd3 third_id_byte=0x51 fourth_id_byte=0x95 - 1GiB, 2048 bytes page

分区怎么弄的不太清楚，或者不需要分区吧。在nandsim的源码有一句这样的:`module_param_array(parts, ulong, &parts_num, 0400)`这个应该是用来分区的吧。

#3.ubi
ubi工作在raw flash设备上，不能工作在MMC、SD、MemoryStick、USB flash driver这样的设备上。

UBI像LVM。Whereas LVM maps logical sectors to physical sectors, UBI maps logical eraseblocks to physical eraseblocks.

有动态和静态两种UBI volumes。静态的只读，动态的可读写。

UBI attach到一个MTD device上，生成一个UBI Device。这个UBI Device上又可以创建几个volumes.然后，这个volumes上面可以创建UBIFS文件系统。

##ubi使用
ubi要attach到一个MTD device上。使用下面主试让ubi attach到一个MTD Device上：

1.ubi模块化编译的

    modprobe ubi mtd=rootfs mtd=config
    modprobe ubi mtd=0 mtd=3

2.ubi编译进内核的

    ubi.mtd=rootfs ubi.mtd=config
    ubi.mtd=0 ubi.mtd=5

3.ubiattach

    ubiattach /dev/ubi_ctrl -m 3

#4.ubifs
挂载：

    mount -t ubifs ubi1_0 /mnt/ubifs - mount volume 0 on UBI device 1

    mount -t ubifs ubi0:rootfs /mnt/ubifs - mount "rootfs" volume of UBI device 0

挂载根文件系统：

    ubi.mtd=0 root=ubi0:rootfs rootfstype=ubifs

#mtd-utils

    ubinfo - provides information about UBI devices and volumes found in the system;
    ubiattach - attaches MTD devices (which describe raw flash) to UBI and creates corresponding UBI devices;
    ubidetach - detaches MTD devices from UBI devices (the opposite to what ubiattach does);
    ubimkvol - creates UBI volumes on UBI devices;
    ubirmvol - removes UBI volumes from UBI devices;
    ubiupdatevol - updates UBI volumes; this tool uses the UBI volume update feature which leaves the volume in "corrupted" state if the update was interrupted; additionally, this tool may be used to wipe out UBI volumes;
    ubicrc32 - calculates CRC-32 checksum of a file with the same initial seed as UBI would use;
    ubinize - generates UBI images;
    ubiformat - formats empty flash, erases flash and preserves erase counters, flashes UBI images to MTD devices;
    mtdinfo - reports information about MTD devices found in the system.

##1.制作UBI image
UBI image要烧到UBI device里去。

The below example demonstrates how to create an UBI/UBIFS image for a 256MiB SLC OneNAND flash chip with 128KiB physical eraseblocks, 2048-byte NAND pages, and 512-byte sub-pages (this means that it allows to do 4x512 bytes writes to the same NAND page, which is quite typical for SLC flashes). The resulting image will have only one UBI volume storing UBIFS file-system.

    $ mkfs.ubifs -q -r root-fs -m 2048 -e 129024 -c 2047 -o ubifs.img
    $ ubinize -o ubi.img -m 2048 -p 128KiB -s 512 ubinize.cfg

where ubinize.cfg contains:

$ cat ubinize.cfg

    [ubifs]
    mode=ubi
    image=ubifs.img
    vol_id=0
    vol_size=200MiB
    vol_type=dynamic
    vol_name=rootfs
    vol_flags=autoresize

Some comments about what the options mean:

    -r root-fs: tells mkfs.ubifs to create an UBIFS image which would have identical contents as the local root-fs directory;
    -m 2048: tells mkfs.ubifs that the minimum input/output unit size of the flash this UBIFS image is created for is 2048 bytes (NAND page in this case);
    -e 129024: logical eraseblock size of the UBI volume this image is created for;
    -c 2047: specifies maximum file-system size in logical eraseblocks; this means that it will be possible to use the resulting file-system on volumes up to this size 文件系统能用的话就有这么大，只能小于或相等(less or equivalent); so in this particular case, the resulting FS may be put on volumes up to about 251MiB (129024 multiplied by 2047); See this section for more details.（就是有多少个块，
    -p 128KiB: tells ubinize that physical eraseblock size of the flash chip the UBI image is created for is 128KiB (128 * 1024 bytes);
    -s 512: tells ubinize that the flash supports sub-pages and sub-page size is 512 bytes; ubinize will take this into account and put the VID header to the same NAND page as the EC header.

##2.烧写UBI image
使用下面命令，不知道dd能行不：

    ubiformat /dev/mtd0 -f ubi.img

##3.UBI image可以有多个volume

$ cat config.ini

    [configuration-data-volume]
    mode=ubi
    image=config_data.img
    vol_id=0
    vol_size=512KiB
    vol_type=static
    vol_name=configuration

    [rootfs-volume]
    mode=ubi
    image=rootfs.img
    vol_id=1
    vol_size=220MiB
    vol_type=dynamic
    vol_name=rootfs
    vol_flags=autoresize

#u-boot
##1.ubi系列命令
1. ubi part mtd分区名 attach到这个mtd上面

2. ubi create rootfs 创建名为rootfs的卷

3. ubi write 0x30000000 rootfs 0xxxxx 把地址位置的mkfs.ubifs生成的img写到rootfs卷中。没有ubi create也是写不了的。

写好了之后就可以ubifsmount与ubifsls挂载与显示文件系统内容了。

##2.nand write
直接把ubinize生成的img用nand write到mtd分区也是可以的。也能用ubifsmount挂载与ubifsls
