---
layout: post
title: "GNU Make"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

写这篇文章是为了做个备忘，看了一下Make的Manual怕忘记一下关键的东西，所以打算写这篇文章，对Manual每章所述做个记录以方便以后复习。

复制的是Manual首页的`The Detailed Node Listing`，然后自己再添加点东东。

#1.Overview of make

Preparing: Preparing and running make
Reading: On reading this text
Bugs: Problems and bugs

#2.An Introduction to Makefiles

这单简单讲一些关于Makefile的东东。

Rule Introduction: What a rule looks like. 更详细的在第4章。
Simple Makefile: A simple makefile 一个最简单的例子，没有使用隐式规则。
How Make Works: How make processes this makefile Make默认从哪个target开始执行？
Variables Simplify: Variables make makefiles simpler 变量的使用。
make Deduces: Letting make deduce the recipe 隐式规则的使用。
Combine By Prerequisite: Another style of makefile 一个target多个规则，见第4章。
Cleanup: Rules for cleaning the directory

#3.Writing Makefiles

Makefile Contents: What makefiles contain.
Makefile Names: How to name your makefile.
Include: How one makefile can use another makefile.
MAKEFILES Variable: The environment can specify extra makefiles.
Remaking Makefiles: How makefiles get remade.
Overriding Makefiles: How to override part of one makefile with another makefile.
Reading Makefiles: How makefiles are parsed.
Secondary Expansion: How and when secondary expansion is performed.

#4.Writing Rules

Rule Example: An example explained.
Rule Syntax: General syntax explained. targets、prerequisites、recipe这三个组成rule的成份。
Prerequisite Types: There are two types of prerequisites.
Wildcards: Using wildcard characters such as `*'.
Directory Search: Searching other directories for source files.
Phony Targets: Using a target that is not a real file's name. 通常target都是文件，Phony target仅仅是让recipe执行的名字，如果你写了一个recipe不会创建target file的rule，recipe会每次都执行。Phony Target是为了排除当前目录下有一个与target文件同名的干扰。
Force Targets: You can use a target without a recipe or prerequisites to mark other targets as phony.
Empty Targets: When only the date matters and the files are empty.
Special Targets: Targets with special built-in meanings.
Multiple Targets: When to make use of several targets in a rule. 一个有多个target的rule相当于写许多个一个target的rule，`$@`变量可以获得这个target的名字。
Multiple Rules: How to use several rules with the same target. 一个文件可以是多个rule的target，所有rule提到的prerequisite会合并成一个该target的prerequisites列表。只能有一个recipe被执行，如果有多个rule为这个文件给出了一个recipe，最后一个recipe执行，同时打印一个错误消息。
Static Pattern: Static pattern rules apply to multiple targets and can vary the prerequisites according to the target name. 这个形式与pattern rule相似。但是只做用这其声明的文件上。
Double-Colon: How to use a special kind of rule to allow several independent rules for one target.
Automatic Prerequisites: How to automatically generate rules giving prerequisites from source files themselves.

#Using Wildcard Characters in File Names

Wildcard Examples: Several examples
Wildcard Pitfall: Problems to avoid.
Wildcard Function: How to cause wildcard expansion where it does not normally take place.

#Searching Directories for Prerequisites

General Search: Specifying a search path that applies to every prerequisite.
Selective Search: Specifying a search path for a specified class of names.
Search Algorithm: When and how search paths are applied.
Recipes/Search: How to write recipes that work together with search paths.
Implicit/Search: How search paths affect implicit rules.
Libraries/Search: Directory search for link libraries.

#Static Pattern Rules

Static Usage: The syntax of static pattern rules.
Static versus Implicit: When are they better than implicit rules?

#5.Writing Recipes in Rules

Recipe Syntax: Recipe syntax features and pitfalls.
Echoing: How to control when recipes are echoed.
Execution: How recipes are executed.
Parallel: How recipes can be executed in parallel.
Errors: What happens after a recipe execution error.
Interrupts: What happens when a recipe is interrupted.
Recursion: Invoking make from makefiles.
Canned Recipes: Defining canned recipes.
Empty Recipes: Defining useful, do-nothing recipes.

#Recipe Syntax

Splitting Lines: Breaking long recipe lines for readability.
Variables in Recipes: Using make variables in recipes.

#Recipe Execution

Choosing the Shell: How make chooses the shell used to run recipes.

#Recursive Use of make

MAKE Variable: The special effects of using ‘$(MAKE)’.
Variables/Recursion: How to communicate variables to a sub-make.
Options/Recursion: How to communicate options to a sub-make.
-w Option: How the ‘-w’ or ‘--print-directory’ option helps debug use of recursive make commands.

#6.How to Use Variables

Reference: How to use the value of a variable. 基本的变量引用方式
Flavors: Variables come in two flavors.
Advanced: Advanced features for referencing a variable. 1.Subsitution References把值的一部分替换成另一部分后再赋值给变量 2.Computed Variable Names 变量名字通过其它变量(`a := $($($(z)))`或其它变量与文本组合(`sources := $($(a1)_objects:.o=.c)`)得出。只要是能得到值的计算都行，可以有函数参与。
Values: All the ways variables get their values. 5种变量：1.运行Make时 2.在makefile中定义的 3.环境变量 4.automatic变量`$@`这样的 5.隐式规则使用的变量
Setting: How to set a variable in the makefile.  
Appending: How to append more text to the old value of a variable.
Override Directive: How to set a variable in the makefile even if the user has set it with a command argument.
Multi-Line: An alternate way to set a variable to a multi-line string. define语句
Environment: Variable values can come from the environment.
Target-specific: Variable values can be defined on a per-target basis.
Pattern-specific: Target-specific variable values can be applied to a group of targets that match a pattern.
Suppressing Inheritance: Suppress inheritance of variables.
Special Variables: Variables with special meaning or behavior.

#Advanced Features for Reference to Variables

Substitution Refs: Referencing a variable with substitutions on the value.
Computed Names: Computing the name of the variable to refer to.

#7.Conditional Parts of Makefiles

Conditional Example: Example of a conditional
Conditional Syntax: The syntax of conditionals.
Testing Flags: Conditionals that test flags.

#8.Functions for Transforming Text

Syntax of Functions: How to write a function call.
Text Functions: General-purpose text manipulation functions.
File Name Functions: Functions for manipulating file names.
Conditional Functions: Functions that implement conditions.
Foreach Function: Repeat some text with controlled variation.
Call Function: Expand a user-defined function. `$(call variable,param,param,...)` function的内容赋值给一个变量，然后这个变量就是variable不需要`$`符号 $(1) $(2)为第一、二个参数，第三个类推。
Value Function: Return the un-expanded value of a variable.
Eval Function: Evaluate the arguments as makefile syntax.
Origin Function: Find where a variable got its value.
Flavor Function: Find out the flavor of a variable.
Shell Function: Substitute the output of a shell command.
Make Control Functions: Functions that control how make runs.

#How to Run make

Makefile Arguments: How to specify which makefile to use.
Goals: How to use goal arguments to specify which parts of the makefile to use.
Instead of Execution: How to use mode flags to specify what kind of thing to do with the recipes in the makefile other than simply execute them.
Avoiding Compilation: How to avoid recompiling certain files.
Overriding: How to override a variable to specify an alternate compiler and other things.
Testing: How to proceed past some errors, to test compilation.
Options Summary: Summary of Options

#10.Using Implicit Rules

Using Implicit: How to use an existing implicit rule to get the recipe for updating a file. 怎样使用一个存在的implicit rule以获得更新文件的recipe。写一个没有recipe的rule，或者不写rule(main.o出现在prerequisite里)
Catalogue of Rules: A list of built-in implicit rules. 一些内置的隐式规则。
Implicit Variables: How to change what predefined rules do.
Chained Rules: How to use a chain of implicit rules.
Pattern Rules: How to define new implicit rules. 写一个pattern rule来(自)定义一个implicit rule。a pattern rule ‘%.o : %.c’ says how to make any file stem.o from another file stem.c.
Last Resort: How to define a recipe for rules which cannot find any.
Suffix Rules: The old-fashioned style of implicit rule.
Implicit Rule Search: The precise algorithm for applying implicit rules.

#Defining and Redefining Pattern Rules

Pattern Intro: An introduction to pattern rules.
Pattern Examples: Examples of pattern rules.
Automatic Variables: How to use automatic variables in the recipe of implicit rules.
Pattern Match: How patterns match.
Match-Anything Rules: Precautions you should take prior to defining rules that can match any target file whatever.
Canceling Rules: How to override or cancel built-in rules.

#Using make to Update Archive Files

Archive Members: Archive members as targets.
Archive Update: The implicit rule for archive member targets.
Archive Pitfalls: Dangers to watch out for when using archives.
Archive Suffix Rules: You can write a special kind of suffix rule for updating archives.

#Implicit Rule for Archive Member Targets

Archive Symbols: How to update archive symbol directories.
